---
sidebar_position: 0
---

# Optimize SIEM Costs

The growing sophistication of security threats makes increasing demands on
security teams ability to manage and analyze large volumes of alerts, events and
other data. But many organizations struggle to balance the data requirements for
comprehensive protection with financial constraints. As the volume of data and
cloud reliance grow, SIEM, cloud, and data costs consume a sizable portion of
security budgets, limiting resources for proactive defense measures. To address
this, businesses must seek innovative technologies to efficiently manage and
analyze data.

![Optimize SIEM Costs](optimize-siem-costs.excalidraw.svg)

Tenzir's innovative Security Data Pipelines provide a cost-effective solution to
help businesses reduce their expenses and optimize their cybersecurity
infrastructure while maintaining comprehensive protection.

:::tip Key Takeaways
- Complex threats require efficient data management and cost-effective
  technologies to optimize resources.
- Escalating data and cloud costs strain budgets and divert funds from critical
  security initiatives.
- Security Data Operations (SecDataOps) focuses on minimizing data costs and
  overheads while maximizing data utilization.
- Tenzir's scalable architecture supports the growth of an organization's
  security infrastructure without exponential cost increases, ensuring long-term
  savings and sustainability.
- Tenzir's security pipelines enable intelligent data filtering, reduction, and
  deduplication to reduce storage and processing costs.
- By implementing Tenzir’s SecDataOps and leveraging security pipelines,
  organizations can efficiently manage security data, reduce SIEM, cloud, and
  data storage costs, and enhance overall operational efficiency.
:::

## Problem: Data and cloud costs are consuming security budgets

The rapid growth of data in cybersecurity operations, combined with the
expanding reliance on cloud computing, has resulted in SIEM, data, and cloud
costs consuming a sizable portion of security budgets. This financial burden not
only limits organizations' ability to invest in essential security measures but
also impedes their ability to proactively defend against ever-evolving threats.

Cyber attacks have become progressively more sophisticated and diverse, and
threat actors are constantly adapting and improving their tactics, techniques
and procedures (TTPs). Defenders must chase a moving target to keep up and be
able to detect and respond to potential eventualities across a porous and
expanding attack surface. Many security operations teams today manage a dizzying
array of security and general-purpose data solutions to achieve the visibility
they require, and especially to manage and make sense of the resulting flood of
alerts. As organizations struggle to scale their infrastructure and processes to
accommodate the growing data demands, they face the following additional
challenges.

### Limited resources

Data engineering teams are often assigned to help security operations with their
data needs but are a scarce resource. Without a breach, security projects are
often not the most critical business priority, leaving little time to consider
efficiency or optimization.

Most security professionals have foundational knowledge of data technology and
processes, but they are rarely proficient at data engineering, or even both.
More importantly, any time they spend on wrangling data is time in which they
are not hunting threats and actively protecting the business.  

In addition, there is an ongoing and acute shortage of skilled security and data
engineers and analysts, placing constraints on placing additional work on either
security or data teams.

### Compliance and privacy risks

Compliance and privacy risks are increasingly important concerns for
organizations managing large volumes of sensitive data in their cybersecurity
operations. Threat detection telemetry and other data that is relevant to
security operations is often distributed across different solutions,
technologies, cloud services and even physical locations, making it difficult to
keep track of everything.

Businesses must navigate diverse regulations, and actively prevent data
breaches, which means applying adequate data protection measures, such as
pseudonymization, encryption, as well as managing the data lifecycle—from
acquisition, through retention, and to disposal.

### Increased data storage and management costs

Data computation and storage costs start small but can quickly snowball over
time. Users often only recognize the Faustian bargain they made too late, when
their data is already locked in, and difficult and expensive to export.

When data costs grow faster than the available security budget, security teams
face a stark choice: What data can we afford to collect - and what can’t we
afford to lose?

Costs also quickly spiral out of control if a need arises to collect and retain
data over longer time frames, especially if data needs to be available on-demand
for live searching or is frequently replayed into MLOps pipelines.

It is not unusual for security teams to run SIEM for event correlation and alert
management, a security data lake for long-term historical investigation and
hunting, and various cloud data storage and micro services for cheap data
retention and special purpose analytics workloads. To gain a complete picture
and respond to threats effectively, data must be moved between all these
technologies, resulting in quickly mounting costs, especially without a coherent
security data strategy.

### Existing approaches fall short

Traditional security solutions are not designed to be data efficient, and
generic data engineering tools, while powerful, require extensive customization
and entail a steep learning curve to be repurposed for reuse in security
operations.

These factors further strain budgets and divert funds from other critical
security initiatives like improving incident response or deriving threat
intelligence.

Considering these challenges, addressing the escalating costs and overheads
associated with SIEM, data, and especially cloud computing has become a top
priority for businesses seeking to maintain a robust cybersecurity posture. By
finding innovative ways to optimize data management and reduce costs,
organizations can not only alleviate financial pressure but also strengthen
their security operations and better protect themselves against the ever-present
threat landscape.

Security teams need innovative strategies and cost-effective technologies that
can efficiently manage, process, and analyze vast amounts of data, while
minimizing the associated expenses and overheads.

### What about XDR?

Many organizations are adopting Extended Detection and Response (XDR) solutions
to consolidate the number of technologies they need to operate and try to
eliminate some of the complexity involved inherent in security operations.

Depending on the specific XDR offering, several security capabilities are
usually consolidated. Endpoint detection and response (EDR), network detection
and response (NDR), cloud detection and response (CDR), incident management, and
threat intelligence are especially common.

XDR streamlines some security data needs, but most security teams will still
need to run additional technologies and integrate with other systems. XDR is
typically delivered as a cloud-hosted SaaS solution, with similar cost dynamics
as cloud SIEM and data lakes.

## Solution: SecDataOps and Tenzir Pipelines

Effective threat detection, investigation, and response increasingly means
mastering data. Security teams require a new strategic approach that considers
cost management and Financial Operations (FinOps) as primary outcomes: Security
Data Operations (SecDataOps).

SecDataOps seeks to minimize data costs, whether computational or storage, while
maximizing data utility and utilization. Controlling SIEM, cloud, and other data
costs means being strategic and aggressive about what data is sent onwards, and
in what shape.

### Data Reshaping and reduction

A lot of information contained in security events is erroneous, repetitive, or
otherwise data-sparse and easily compressed. By filtering, deduplicating, and
compacting data at the edge before it reaches expensive consumption-based
services and solutions, it is possible to achieve anywhere between 30% and 80%
cost reduction. Moving the right data at the right time to the right place can
drastically lower SIEM, Cloud and data costs.

### Data compaction

Data retention policies are often based on simply aging out older data. Distinct
types of data have different business and lifetime values. Instead of just
deleting the oldest data, Tenzir's unique compaction algorithm applies aging
based on the relative importance of the data.

We can also deploy aggregation pipelines to shrink data by choosing context over
fidelity. For example, by converting flow records into an aggregate matrix of
who communicated with whom, the data may shrink 10x in size but it's still
possible to answer questions like "have we had communication with this entity?".
This gracefully degrades the data fidelity and limits the utility, instead of
abruptly throwing data away.

### Data pre-processing and enrichment

Enriching alert, event, and telemetry data with user, asset, and threat
intelligence context is often done on several occasions across different
solutions. Similarly, executing detection content, such as Sigma rules, is also
often repeated in many instances. Pushing enrichment and detection content
execution down to the network edge eliminates duplicate effort, processes data
where it’s most cost-effective and ensures that the same enriched data is
available consistently for any workloads.

## Conclusion

Tenzir's innovative SecDataOps approach and Security Data Pipelines offer an
innovative approach for organizations seeking to balance their cybersecurity
needs with financial constraints. By optimizing data management, reducing SIEM,
cloud, and data costs, and streamlining operations, businesses can allocate more
resources to proactive threat hunting and incident response. Tenzir empowers
organizations to maintain and sustain moving-target defense while simultaneously
reducing the financial burden associated with traditional security
infrastructure management.
